# Diffusion Models Are Real-Time Game Engines

This is an unofficial repo of [GameNGen](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.14837). I have referred to [arnaudstiegler/gameNgen-repro](https://github.com/arnaudstiegler/gameNgen-repro/tree/main) in order to create this repo.

## Modifications
Here are the list of modifications from [arnaudstiegler/gameNgen-repro](https://github.com/arnaudstiegler/gameNgen-repro/tree/main).
- Fixed the environment setup with Anaconda and write down the precise commands in order to properly reproduce the code.
- Fixed the training steps to properly train the PPO agents within VizDoom environment

## To Do
- [x] Set `MOVE_LEFT` and `MOVE_RIGHT` as independent actions
- [x] Enable distributed training
- [ ] Implement playable generative environments
- [ ] Try using the original settings
  - **VizDoom**
  - [x] Add `MOVE_BACKWARD` action
  - [x] Enable to collect VizDoom dataset with multiprocessing during RL policy training
  - **Diffusion Models**
  - [x] 2e-5 for the learning rate
  - [x] Adafactor optimizer
  - [x] A context length of 64
  - [ ] Set action embedding as `trainable_params`
  - [ ] Pad every image frame to get 320x256 from 320x240
  - [ ] Create dataloader that makes sure it won't pick frames from two distinct episodes for each batch

## Artifacts

All artifacts are available on Hugging Face Hub:

Checkpoints:
- [gameNgen-baseline-20ksteps](https://huggingface.co/arnaudstiegler/gameNgen-baseline-20ksteps)
- [sd-model-gameNgen-60ksteps](https://huggingface.co/arnaudstiegler/sd-model-gameNgen-60ksteps)

Datasets:
- [vizdoom-5-episodes-skipframe-4-lvl5](https://huggingface.co/arnaudstiegler/vizdoom-5-episodes-skipframe-4-lvl5)
- [vizdoom-500-episodes-skipframe-4-lvl5](https://huggingface.co/arnaudstiegler/vizdoom-500-episodes-skipframe-4-lvl5)

Vizdoom Agent:
- `ViZDoomPPO/logs/models/deathmatch_simple/best_model.zip` (local)

## Scripts

### Generate the training data

First, follow the commands below in order to create an environment to train Vizdoom agent.
```
conda create -n vizdoom python=3.11 -y
conda activate vizdoom
apt update && apt install libgl1 swig g++ -y
pip install setuptools==65.5.0 pip==21 wheel==0.38.0
cd ViZDoomPPO/
pip install -r vizdoom_requirements.txt
```

Then, run the following command to train an agent on vizdoom:
```
python train_ppo_parallel.py
```

Once the agent is trained, generate episodes and upload them as a HF dataset using:
```
python load_model_generate_dataset.py --episodes {number of episodes} --output parquet --upload --hf_repo {name of the repo}
```

Note: you can also generate a gif file to QA the behavior of the agent by running:
```
python load_model_generate_dataset.py --episodes 1 --output gif
```


### Train the diffusion model

Second step is that follow the commands below in order to create an environment to train diffusion model.
```
conda deactivate
conda create -n diffusion python=3.11 -y
conda activate diffusion
pip install -r diffusion_requirements.txt
```

#### Single GPU
If you only have single gpu, follow the instruction below to train the diffusion model.
Debug training with single GPU.
```
sh train_diffusion_scripts/debug_single_gpu.sh
```

Start full training with single GPU.
```
sh train_diffusion_scripts/single_gpu.sh
```

#### Multiple GPUs
If you have more than single GPU, follow the instruction below to train the diffusion model.
Debug training with multiple GPUs.
```
sh train_diffusion_scripts/debug_multi_gpus.sh
```

Start full training with multiple GPUs.
```
sh train_diffusion_scripts/multi_gpus.sh
```

### Train the auto-encoder

```
python finetune_autoencoder.py --hf_model_folder {path to the model folder}
```

### Run inference (generating a single image)

```
python run_inference.py --model_folder arnaudstiegler/sd-model-gameNgen-60ksteps
```

### Run autoregressive inference

This will generate rollouts, where each new frame is generated by the model conditioned on the previous frames and actions.
We initially fill the buffer using the small dataset, and sample actions from the dataset (i.e it matches what the agent did in the episode)

```
python run_autoregressive.py --model_folder arnaudstiegler/sd-model-gameNgen-60ksteps
```

## References

### Paper
- [Diffusion Models Are Real-Time Game Engines](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.14837)

### GitHub Repos
- [arnaudstiegler/gameNgen-repro](https://github.com/arnaudstiegler/gameNgen-repro/tree/main)
- [lkiel/rl-doom](https://github.com/lkiel/rl-doom)
